Charles Crawford, side two. Not a doctor. You're
not a doctor? I'm sorry. You know, professors at
A&M, you just assume that... In those days, there
were very few doctors on the campus. Is that right?
There were not half a dozen when I first came on the
faculty. You didn't need your... If a man had a
master's degree, he was considered pretty well
qualified. I wish it were that way today. You need
your doctorate to... It makes a difference. We
were talking about council meetings and We were
talking earlier about Lloyd Smith being the city
manager. He, as I understand it, he was called a
business manager until 1944, and the council then
implemented the city manager type of government.
Do you remember that? I sure don't. You don't?
Okay. I have to admit I don't. All right. Do you
remember how the operations of the city were
financed? How did you go about financing whatever
projects? Well, we had some city taxes, but they
were very low, and we actually operated on a very
small budget, just a shoestring, and the city
manager, I don't imagine the city manager got more
than $300 a month. And it was a full-time job. Yes,
it was a full-time job.
One time, another Mr. Brown, I can't think, he was a
brother to Frank Brown, our main electrician for
A&M, worked there in College Station in the city,
worked city office, I don't remember exactly what
his position was, but I remember he worked, he was
former partner of Brown Allen Old Mobile Cadillac
Company, former partner in that business. One of
the councilmen? No, he wasn't a councilman. I
don't remember what his position was. He was
employed in some way, but I kind of believe he might
have been city manager. One time. Oh, he might have
been. Forgotten. After all, a good many years have
passed since those days. That's right. Well, did
Lloyd Smith present the problems to the council? I
was wondering how, did he mainly take care of most
of the problems? He took care of most of them and he
just consulted with the people on the council and
whenever we'd have meetings, we'd discuss all the
problems and see what was going on and decide on
things that needed to be done and he pretty well
carried them out. Do you think this was a good type
of way to operate a city? Well, I think at the time
and under the circumstances why it wasn't bad. In
fact, there was so little money available that it
was more or less, they cut
They operated just more or less on a very limited
budget and carried on the business very
informally. I guess for those years it wasn't bad.
Wasn't bad. No. I think, okay, 1946, and this is
towards the very end of your term, as I understood
it from reading the minutes, the council decided
to hold a bond election. Do you remember that?
Because this is a big change. They never had, you
know, had never borrowed a great sum of money
before. Actually, I can't recall that. You can't
recall the bond? No, I can't recall it. Well, I
might have the dates mixed up, so it may not have
happened during your term. Do you remember any
kind of projects that the council wanted to do? For
instance, you were talking about paving the
streets. What other type of projects were you
council interested in?
I don't actually remember any projects, just
day-to-day operation and financing the
operation by our taxes and they were very low and
the amount of work being done was very, very
limited. So actually I don't remember any major
projects except the street paving that was done by
local
forces And it was, I don't believe we let any
contracts outside of the city at that time. Just
went ahead and under the city manager, went up and
had the streets graded, had the asphalt put down,
and had the gravel put on top of that. It was all done
locally. What streets were decided, how did you
decide what streets would be paved this way? I
believe that the streets that were paved that way
were those The first that were south of the campus
and they were only one or two, I
guess there were three or four or five streets that
were paved out for a half a mile from the campus. And
the same thing up in College Hills, East Gate.
There were several streets up there like Walton
Drive and Main Drive up there. several of those
streets were black topped with local labor and
with local supervision. There was some point, and
I'm not sure this is when you were council, that the
people that were on the street had to petition to
have curb and gutters put in and the city would
finance one-third and then the people would
finance the other two-thirds. Was that in your
term? I don't believe it was. It was later on. Yes, I
believe it was. We had very little curb in those
days. It was just basically this black topping as
you were... Yes, black topping. The fire and the
police department were real small. The fire, you
depended on A&M's fire department, and police
maybe had one policeman? I think I was about right.
About one policeman and just about all. Was this
adequate? Well, for those days we had no
particular trouble. We had, as I recall, we never
had any real disturbance in Bryan. Occasionally
somebody would have to be arrested, but it was
very, very seldom. And we had very little police
work in those days. And fire, were there not very
many fires that you can remember? I don't remember
any major fires. Maybe there was a few houses that
were burned, but I really don't recall any major
fires. And the city used the A&M's fire
department? Yes.
Today, College Station places a lot of importance
on having enough parks for the people. Was this
important when you were on the council? We hadn't.
It was not important. People had very little
recreation area. some areas that were left when
the city was incorporated left vacant for parks,
but as I recall, there's only a park of any
considerable size or two, one down in the
southwest of the campus and the other up in College
Hills. There's a little area in College Hills
that's about Howard Judge not more than three
acres that's still in the parkway up there. And
there's a pipe swing up there that belonged to my
daughter and it was moved off the campus when I
moved from the campus up there. And Frank Brown had
pulled up from the ground and put it down out there
in that park. Is this where Thomas Park is today?
No, Thomas Park is in Bryan, isn't it? No, well, I
think Thomas Park is, if I'm correct, is the one
that's right behind City Hall today. Yes, I think
that's... Is that where the park was? Well, that
was used mainly for storage for equipment in those
days. The area behind City Hall today? What
used... Are you talking about the old City Hall
down next to the railroad? No, sir, the one that's
presently at Eastgate, the one that's where we had
the City Hall today, it's right across. Well, this
one is one up on Pereira. Pereira, this old park
that you're talking about? Yes, that's the one I'm
talking about. Okay, I know where that is. That's a
couple blocks further back from the highway. So
the council really wasn't all that concerned with
recreation. No. This is something that's
developed later on. Okay. Zoning has always been
important in College Station. I don't think we had
any zoning in those days. Oh, you don't remember
any zoning? I don't remember any zoning. But we do
today. Oh, yes. Why do you think they implemented
it? Bryan doesn't have zoning, and College
Station does. Well, I think it was a desire of some
people to see that there was an orderly
development of the area, and they didn't want the
areas to be so cluttered with some residences and
some better sizes, but there was very little
zoning going on at that time. But later on they just
wanted to make sure that they had... That's right.
Orderly development was needed. And I think it's
still needed. Do you think it's not having zoning
has hurt the way Bryan has developed as far as...
Well, you see it's become such a city that since
Bryan was not zoned, why, there were little
patches of business, a business house or two here
and there, little areas covered not more than one
or two blocks. And it has not meant a very orderly
development of the city because some of the people
object to having a business next door. And for that
reason, why College Station, of course, has grown
so rapidly in the last 15 years that if I think it was
highly desirable that certain areas be
restricted to certain purposes. Do you know why
Bryan never zoned? Since it grew up so slowly and it
developed. You see up until, compared with recent
years, Bryan wasn't a very big town. I can remember
Bryan when it was only 10,000 people. Oh really?
And when we moved to Bryan, I bet there weren't more
than 8,000 to 10,000 people in Bryan. And when was
that? When I moved to Bryan? 1912. 1912. And it had
been, I believe it has been a city or a settlement
since like the 1840s. Somewhere around that. So
it's an old city. And Harvey Mitchell, the man who
had a lot of influence in helping establish A&M,
was one of the merchants. The story is told that a
stranger rode up out to Boonville, which is about
three miles east of Brown, out towards the road
that leads over to Rams County and Highway 105.
Now, not 105 either. Forgotten the number. But
anyway, there was a store there that had general
merchandise. and there was a man sitting on the
store gallery. You know what a gallery is? No. We
call it a porch. The porch. Little porch or
gallery. There was a man sitting there, and this
stranger rode up on a horse and says,
this man greeted him and says, get down, stranger.
So he got down, came up, and he says,
who is the...
I guess he was mayor. He says, Harv Mitchell. He
says, well, courthouse right across there. Is
that the courthouse? He said, yes. He says, who's
county judge? He says, Harv Mitchell. He asked
several others, talked a little bit longer. He
says, I want to get the county clerk to record
something. He says, who is county clerk? He says,
Harv Mitchell. Finally the man looked at him and
says, is Harvey Mitchell the whole damn town? He
said, no, not at all. He said, I'm Harvey Mitchell.
Oh, how funny. That story, of course, I don't know
whether it's true or not, but that's one I've heard
many, many years ago. Was this, if I've got this
straight, he was in Boonville, at a store in
Boonville? Boonville, yeah. Harvey Mitchell was
sitting there? Okay, okay. You know that the
building right next to the YMCA is Boyle Health
Center. Uh-huh. That occupies the site that
Harvey Mitchell Hall used to be on. Oh, really?
That was a three-story building. I believe it was a
four-story building. Anyway, it was the site
of... Harvey Mitchell Hall, named after Harvey
Mitchell. The pictures of the old buildings that
are in your book, they're very beautiful
buildings. I'm sorry they don't exist today. I
know. We've talked a little bit about this, but as I
read the papers, there's a rather historic
rivalry between Bryan and College Station. After
the organization of the College Station as a city,
there was a good deal of rivalry. There was a great
deal of rivalry? And some of the people felt very
strongly about it. There were a couple of men in
Bryan who felt strongly about it, and then that
engendered an anti-feeling out here. So it was
some pretty pretty strong rivalry and pretty
sharp words passed between some of the people
between Bryan and College Station and yeah, Bryan
and College Station. Did the councils try to
maintain peaceful relations? We always had good
relations with people in Bryan. I know of no time
when I was on the council had anything to do with it.
There was ever any real friction. Do you remember
Mayor Langford had a brother, Ivan, and he was the
mayor of Bryan, I believe. He was mayor of Bryan for
several terms and was later president of the Bryan
Building and Loan. He was. He was in that new
building when it was built at the present location
of Bryan Building and Loan, which is now called
Brazos Building and Loan. Right, I've seen that.
Which has now been bought by the city savings and
loan of San Angelo. Oh, really? I didn't know that.
Same one that bought the community savings loan
out here. Oh, they bought that, too? Yes, they just
bought it. I didn't know they had. Those of us who
own stock in it turned in our stock certificates
within the last few days. Because San Angelo
bought the community savings bank that is on
University? Yeah. It was bought by San Angelo?
That's right. It was bought by City Savings Loan of
San Angelo. which is owned by the Lamar Savings
Loan of Austin. Are they going to still call it
Community Savings Loan? I don't know whether
they'll continue to call it that or not. Well, you
turned in your stock certificate. Did they pay you
for it? Well, they will. They will. Haven't yet. We
were talking about the rivalry between Bryan. Do
you know of any examples, anything that you can
point to that might illustrate it, I guess?
I know that Mayor
Jaeger was quite active in trying to incorporate
College Station into Bryan. And I don't know of
any, yes I do, there was a lawyer by the name of Loth
Henderson who was quite active in wanting to
incorporate College Station into Bryan. And I
think they were two of the men that really did their
best to prevent College Station being organized
as a city. I know that when Mr. Gilchrist was here as
president, why, he and some of the men of Brown who
acted at that time would pace each other and
wouldn't speak. Oh, really? Do you remember them
going to the, I guess it might have been Attorney
General, Brian, these Brian men, and trying to
keep them from being College Station
Incorporated? No, I don't remember
that. Okay. Did the council have any specific plan
for growth? No, no particular plan. It really
wasn't growing that fast? No, it was growing
steadily but not rapidly. Like today, for
instance. Of course, the comparison between then
and today is a contrast rather than a comparison
because College Station and Bryan have become
cities now. And in those days, they were just
country towns. They were just country towns, even
Brian was. Do you remember any big problem during
your term? Any big problem that the council had to
deal with?
Really, I don't. I don't even recall any major
problems that came up. Of course, I'm sure there
were some, but I wasn't involved, so I don't
recall. Do you feel like there was anything that
you can name as a great achievement or one of the
biggest achievements that the city and the
council took care of when you were on the council?
I sure couldn't say that there was anything. It was
a great achievement because we were going along
very
shall I say sedately and quietly and developing as
new homes were built in the area. And after it was
unincorporated, of course, the area began to
build up. And that's the time when the Eastgate
area developed several stores. And the
bus used to stop over at the Eastgate But then came
on into the campus and had a little stop on the
corner of where next to the telephone office and
had the bus stop right along there. But in those
days, it was just a very quiet little town going
along about its business. A&M was, at that time,
only about 3,000 or 3,500 students. See, when I
entered A&M, there were only 1,100 students in
all. And half of those, nearly 600 of them, were
freshmen. Oh, my heavens. Half of them were
freshmen. And you see, that meant that the
buildings on the campus take care of things pretty
well. And academic building was always one of the
major class buildings, classroom buildings. And
that's where the president's office was for many
years. You see, the old main building burned in
1912. And they think it was an arson. Oh, they did? A
bunch of students. Oh, how terrible. It destroyed
the building there. They tried to tried to knock
down the walls of that building after the fire, and
they got some of the artillery cannons from A&M and
got out there and tried to shoot those walls down,
and they couldn't budge them. Those cannonballs
would go into those walls. They were about two feet
thick, two and a half feet thick, but it was a loss of
a real good building there, and it was a real
setback for A&M. They don't make buildings like
that today, do they? No, they don't. I'll tell you,
the present academic building is built almost
that way. It's very thick walls. It looks that way.
And Dr. F.E. Gieske was the architect on that
building. He was one of the first two A&M graduates
to get a degree in A&M. Oh, and become an architect.
Later on, he was... head of the architecture
department, head of the drawing department, then
also head of architecture and architectural
engineering.
You said that there was some stores that built at
Eastgate. What were these stores that built at
Eastgate? Luke's Grocery was the only one that I
remember. I believe that there was a real estate
office, Color Pepper Real Estate, if I'm not
mistaken. But Luke's Grocery was the main one and
that's where people in that area over there across
the road, highway, traded mostly. What were the
citizens of College Station like? What was the
character of the town? Mainly good old country
folks. Very friendly? Yes, very friendly. Since
you have your south and your east and your north, do
you feel like that divided the city? Was the city
unified? It didn't unify, but it didn't seem to
separate. In other words, it was a matter of
convenience. It wasn't a matter of rivalry so
much. It was a matter of convenience for the people
who lived close to the campus. North Gate has been
there the longest, then the South Gate, and then
East Gate. And as the area developed, residential
area, why, the people in that area, a lot of them
didn't have automobiles. Automobiles were not as
numerous in that day as they are now. But it was no
particular rivalry. It's just a matter of
convenience. From having stores there? Yeah,
having stores where they can shop. Did College
Station have any kind of transportation for its
citizens? No. At one time there was a bus that ran
out from Bryan to College Station. I don't know how
to call it. Bryan, after the
trolley was discontinued, there was a bus
service. And lots of people rode the bus for a good
many years from Bryan out to College Station. But
as far as getting around College Station, there
really wasn't... No, there was nothing. No bus
service within the city itself. It's between
Bryan and College Station. Can you describe the
leadership of Ernest Langford? He ran the city for
20 years, and unfortunately he died a couple years
ago. So... Ernest
Langford was a very unusual individual and he came
to A&M in the drawing department after he'd been
out of school, out of A&M, only about two or three
years. He went over to Austin and was in
architectural drafting as a draftsman, as an
architect over there for about I think it was about
three years, and that's where he married. And he
and
Ms. Langford were married in Austin and came to
College Station, and he taught for several years
until Dean Nagel, he had an opportunity for a
scholarship up at the University of Illinois, and
he went in to see Dean Nagel about it, Dean Nagel was
the first dean of engineering at A&M in 1911 or 12.
And when he told Mr. Nagel about it, why, Mr. Nagel
says, I want you to take it. He said, I'll write out
your resignation right now. He said, I'll take
care of that. So he just practically pushed him out
the door. And he went to University of Illinois.
And he was at University of Illinois about, I don't
know, six or seven years where he got his master's
degree and also designed one of the houses that won
a national award for a two-story
home. And then after Dean Bolton became dean, he
got Mr. Lankford to come back in the architecture
department because There'd been several
architects in the meantime, and he got Mr.
Langford back. And
Mr. Langford was head of the architecture
department from, I'm not sure of the years, but I
would say for at least 20 years. He was made head of
architecture, I believe, the same summer that I
was made head of mechanical engineering. I'm not
positive of that, but I think that's right. at that
time. And then when he was elected mayor, he spent
many, many hours down at the office there and
devoted a great deal of time to the city. And he did,
I guess he made as big a contribution to the city of
College Station as any one man ever did. And he
was also when he retired he was made archivist and
at that time we had no archival department and he
became archivist and was given one room over in the
MSC as his and he began to collect things
he was the second archivist Mr. Cofer was the first
and Mr. Cofer retired professor of English and He
served as archivist for, I'd say, two or three or
four years. And then Mr. Lankford came in. And he
occupied that office until the new
Cushing Library was built. And they gave him a room
in the Cushing Library. And he was archivist there
for a good many years. He read extensively. He was a
very voracious reader and also wrote a number of
pamphlets and things that had to do with the
development of A&M University, Texas A&M. But he
had one son, Keith, and Keith, after he moved off
the campus and built his home, down on Langford
Street, where he and Leela lived there until Mr.
Langford died. Mr. Langford died at about 91 years
old. Oh, I know. Yeah, something like that. But Ms.
Langford still lives down there, and I talk to her
occasionally. Do you know what subdivision that
is in? No, I don't. It's on Langford Drive. Yeah.
Named for him. That's right. Well, as a mayor, did
he show a lot of foresight? Did he want to plan? Yes,
he did quite a bit of planning, and he had a lot to do
with the development and layout of the streets and
things at College Station, especially that south
Texas area. Also, he was instrumental in working
in that northeast area up there where I lived. But
he made a good mayor and devoted a lot of time to it,
and especially in setting taxes and tax hearings,
things like that. He was quite active in things
like that. Well, he sounds like a remarkable man.
He was a remarkable individual. Did you have any
time on the council that some of the council
members had different opinions? There was only
one time. while I was on the council in those four
years, that we had a real disagreement and
difference of opinion and had a split vote. And
that split vote was about five to one. What was it
over? Over giving special electric rates to the
First Baptist Church. And what was the outcome?
Well, I don't remember exactly what it was, but
they worked out a program that was mutually
agreeable between Brother Brown and the rest of
the council. Oh, I see. I see. He wanted electric
rates. That was the only time that we ever had a real
split in the vote. Was Mr. Langford able to? He was
pretty politic in there. I only saw him lose his
temper one time during the whole time that I worked
with him, and that was with Mr. Clark, who
developed that southwest area. But he and Mr.
Clark had a difference of opinion. He kind of lost
his temper one time. Do you remember what that was
all about? It was about some tax renditions in
areas where Professor Clark was developing
new... The Knoll? Yeah, Knoll. And Dr. Clark
didn't agree with the tax assessment? Well, we
didn't agree with Dr. Clark. He wanted certain tax
concessions and renditions much lower than we
felt was reasonable. And we just disagreed with
him and put him down. And so the council set the rate
and he had to pay it? Well, it was just a matter of,
you know, they have what they call an equalization
board. And they get together every year, or I guess
it is every year, maybe every other year, and go
over the renditions and see if taxes have been
rendered somewhat equally and equal values equal
equal projects and I've served on that two or three
different times and we always tried to look at the
situation find out other where other houses were
valued just about the same that were equal value
cost and It was just a matter of routine operation.
Of course, we had tried to keep the tax values down
and keep them at least equalized. That was the
whole point of it. And the assessment that the
board made, Dr. Clark, was in agreement? Well, the
assessments were made by the city, by the council
and the city. I don't remember who was on the tax
board, but the I
can't think of the name of that group, the
Equalization Board. We would be appointed from
year to year in different groups, and they would
try their best to satisfy the people and to see that
things were fair. Did most people pay their taxes?
Oh, yes. Very little trouble with people not
paying taxes. So the character of the town was a...
Oh yeah. Very caring type of town. Most people
cooperating with, most people in College Station
were pretty proud of this city. They were pleased
with it. They had reason to. And you see when they,
you kept the same mayor for nearly 20 years, well
you know that things were running along pretty
smoothly. That's right. Wasn't much division.
That's right. Very good point. As I was reading
your book, I noticed that many of the professors in
the engineering department or people who were
connected with the engineering department also
became involved with the city. There's all sorts
of men. Is there any particular reason? Well, they
were just interested and felt like they could
render a service. Now, Joe Orr was a professor of
civil engineering, and there's a street down
there named Orr Street. It was a matter of interest
and a matter of feeling that they could do a job that
was worthwhile. Can you tell me anything about Mr.
Orr? He also, his dad, he seemed to also be a leader
in the community. Joe was pretty forthright in his
speaking and his approach to things. And if he
disagreed, why, he said so. He spoke up and
expressed himself. But as a civil engineer, he was
interested in, of course, the streets and the
paving, and did have quite a bit of influence in
some of the major engineering problems in the
city. So, Joe was, had been in South America after
he graduated from A&M and came back to A&M and was
mainly surveying. And he was one of the few, at that
time, one of the few licensed land surveyors in the
area. And he trained lots of students in the area of
plain surveying. He surveyed the boundaries of
College Station. I think he also surveyed this
spot right here. Oh, really? For Bryant? Yeah.
Well, he did it for me. I wanted to have my corners
specified and have them certified, so I got a
licensed surveyor to do that after I bought the
lot. But do you feel like College Station was lucky
to have men such as? Yes, I do. I think those men
served well and did a good job. I think it was a very
unselfish service. and you didn't receive any
money. No, no money. But is there an advantage in
having people from a university running the city?
Well, it's changed now. So the city and the
university both have completely changed.
They're not the same place they were 30 years ago.
And at that time, the majority of people at the
college station were employed by A&M. Today, that
isn't the case. That's true. The same way with
Brian. You see, at present time, the faculty of A&M
forms, say, 2,500 people. I don't know what it is,
but out of 50,000.
So that's a very small percentage. In those days,
it was a much larger percentage. Almost all of the
people. That's right. That's interesting.
Let me see. How do you feel about the way College
Station has developed? There's a push to bring
more industry in this area. Do you feel like that is
needed here? Or why didn't you want it when you were
coming down? Since it's become a city. why it's
pretty necessary that they have some industry.
And I'm not too happy with large quantity of
industry, but it's necessary to develop a city to
have a tax base that can do things. And if you don't
have some industry,
all the burden has to be borne by ad valorem tax on
property. And if you want to expand and really have
some activity, why, you need the industry. Now
then, I've been surprised at the amount of heavy
industry in North Brown. I know. There's a lot.
There's much more industry there than I had any
idea would ever develop in Brown. Now, College
Station is trying to get some medium industries.
Also, something in the way of advanced
technology.
To go along with the college? And this Texas
Instruments out here is located right across the
East Bypass. And since it is a highly scientific
group, it can tie in with the instruction. And it's
a good contact. for students and for the
university. And with several of those, that type
of industry, why, it would become a real asset to
our teaching. So it is, now, in some ways, it
doesn't improve the residential area, but if it's
properly segregated and properly zoned, why, it
still doesn't, those industries are pretty good
neighbors. And they quite often do things that are
needed, and they also separate their areas from
the residential area in a way that isn't very
objectionable. When you were on the council,
however, We didn't have problems like that. You
didn't need to worry about bringing in industry?
You didn't feel like it was, town was ready for it?
We weren't concerned with
it. How would you have liked to see College Station
develop differently, or would you have?
Well, to tell you the truth, I've
don't know the answer to that question. I don't
know how it would have been very different. And
since it grew up gradually and changed over a long
period of time, and I was here all that time, the
changes were so gradual that I wasn't too aware of
just how it was going, especially in recent years.
See, I've been retired nearly 18 years. And since
that time, boy, there's lots of development been
going on. So I really wasn't too involved in it. Is
there anything else that you would like to add that
I haven't asked about? Any
bit of information that would be interesting to
people about College Station? Well, of course,
you're interested in the city of College Station
more than you are in Texas A&M, aren't you? Well,
yes, sir, but I know they're tied together. There
have been certain people that have contributed to
A&M that I think stand out. For instance, Dean
Nagel, first dean of engineering. And he was head
of the civil engineering department. And then you
see one time civil engineering and physics were
combined. Of course, most people don't know that.
He was dean of engineering for several years and
then he became Texas' first
water engineer. And he went to Austin and was gone
for a few years and during that time Dean Spence was
dean, but Dean Spence died after a few years and
they got Dean Nagel back here. And Dr. Brazell was,
I think, one of the outstanding presidents that
A&M has ever had. And then Dean Nagler resigned a
second time, and that's when Dean Bolton became
Dean of Engineering. And Dean Bolton had a lot to do
with A&M. He was a very quiet individual, but very
thorough, and he was known as Bad Tracks. That was
his nickname, head of the electrical engineering
department. He first started as professor.